---
title: "Use a publicly accessible repository with version control "
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What is version control?"
- "Why would I use version control?"
- "Why would I use a publicly accessible repository?"
objectives:
- "Understand the benefits of version control"
- "Understand the benefits of making your code public"
- "Familiarize with GitHub"
- "Learn how to create a GitHub repository"
keypoints:
- "Version control systems help to organize and collaborate on code"
- "Using a public repository contributes to the reproducibility, reusability and quality of your code"
---
The [first principle](https://fair-software.eu/recommendations/repository) states:
> ## Principle 1
> Use a publicly accessible repository with version control
{: .callout}

## Why version control
Using a version control system allows you to easily track changes in your software, both your own changes as well as those made by collaborators. There are many flavors of version control systems, ranging from older systems such as CVS and Subversion to more modern ones such as Git, Mercurial, and Bazaar. By configuring your version control system to use GitHub, GitLab or Bitbucket, you’ll even have backups of every version of the software you ever made. Additionally, those platforms offer collaboration tools such as an issue tracker and project management tools, and you’ll be able to use third-party services such as code quality checkers, correctness checkers, and a lot more.

> ## Exercise
>
> What is the difference between using a version control system, and using a cloud storage system (Google Drive, DropBox, OneDrive, etc)?
>
{: .challenge}


## Why public
Developing scientific software in publicly accessible repositories enables early involvement of users, helps build collaborations, contributes to the reproducibility of results generated by the software, facilitates software reusability, and contributes to improving software quality. Taken together, this ensures that your software has the best chance of being used by as many people as possible while promoting transparency.
> ## Exercise
>
> What are the consequences of open sourcing your code?
>
{: .challenge}

## Getting started with git and GitHub
Although there are different version control systems available, Git is the most feature-rich, most modern and most popular by a good margin. The platforms GitHub.com, Bitbucket.org and GitLab.com all have smooth integrations with git.

A good starting point to learn about git is the [Software Carpentry git novice lesson](http://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/).

{% include links.md %}
